I had my second talk of the day. The first talk was very somewhat topic, but it focused
more on the distribution side of things, how to build all this stuff. I welcome you to
look at the video if you have some time later, because what I'll not be able to answer in
these 20 minutes, hopefully the other talk might.
So I will talk about this in boots, this in BSTAP UKIs and what those are, and why you
should all switch to that, of course.
So let's jump right in. So system reboot, what is it? We usually call it bootloader,
but it actually isn't. It's a stupid boot menu. Like if a bootloader, at least in my
view, is something that actually is capable of loading sectors onto disk, parthing them,
and then eventually setting up the boot params and jumping into this, we do nothing of that
in system reboot. All we do is we give you a menu and you pick something, and then we
chain load some other UFI binary. So yeah, it's a fancy boot menu, nothing else. Makes
it on one hand dumb, but also nice and robust.
It's built around this model that you have drop-in files inside of a directory, which
I guess is very different from Grub where you have these boot scripts and things like
this. Our way to configure things is supposed to be as simple as possible and modeled after
how we started doing things in package management and classic Linux distributions like that,
but it's not this pattern where it has this directory, like a configuration directory or
a directory where you put desktop files on the desktop into and things like that, where
every package can put more stuff into it, and then the combination of all of them is what
makes the system work. And we just said, okay, let's do it the same way. Have one directory
in the ESP, and people that want to populate the boot menu just put one file in there,
and that's what populates the boot menu, and that's already it.
So, yeah, it just takes basically this Linux pattern around package management and just
takes it to the boot loader stuff.
So, this boot is UFI only, right? Like, this makes things nice because it basically means
we don't have to actually do any boot loading. It implements something we call the boot loader
spec, which is spec we wrote ourselves. Actually, it just basically tries to define in abstract
terms how, like, where to place kernels, where to place descriptions of what to boot.
It supports two kinds of menu entries. Type one and type two, we call them, I think the
focus should always be nowadays on type two because they have much nicer properties regarding
measurement, cryptography, and things like that. But type one still exists, and people
will continue to use it because it's more flexible in regards, it allows you to configure
the individual items manually.
Type one is a configuration file, basically, which just says use that kernel, use that
in already, use that stuff and things like that. Type two is something where the boot
menu items are just binaries, UKIs, as we call them, UKIs. We'll talk about this later
in more detail, but the very short version of that is it's a kernel glued together with
its init.rd and a couple of other things and then turned into one UFI binary. So, basically
takes much of the early state of the OS and makes one thing out of it that can be updated
as one, signed as one, measured as one, loaded as one, which makes it robust and secure and
very nice.
Since Friday or something, System Boot is also like eligible for signing, like Suze actually
did this ahead of time, but now it's officially okay, so you can get it assigned by Shim with
the same infrastructure and things like exactly like you can get grub signed.
System Boot is supposed to be fully automatic, no configuration, right? Like there's no boot
scripts, no nothing. I mean, there are some configuration options, but the design is to
just work and not require configuration, right? It should be just one binary you drop in and
then you have this other directory where you drop in the menu entries and that's supposed
to be it. Of course, there is something like you can configure something in EFI variables
and there is also a configuration file, but that's just for the nerds and it's not supposed
to be the default.
It also has a nice functionality that besides looking at these directories for boot menu
items actually capable of finding Windows installations automatically and Mac OS, which
is kind of nice because you don't have to configure that either, right? Like from the
West you don't need to do anything. SD boot when it boots up, it just looks, oh, is there
also Windows installation that adds the one awake? It's really nice because it's robust
and it has also benefited that if you add Windows after you install Linux it will just
show up.
It also has APIs to user space, which I think is very important, right? Like for us, the
bootloader world and the user space world are not distinct, right? Like they are closely
intertwined for various reasons, like for example, because user space adds and manages
the boot menu entries because from user space you generally might want to be able to select
what's going to be booted next because there are things like automatic boot assessment,
right? That you figure out did this boot actually work? If it worked, booted forever
in the next time, if it didn't work and you've tried a couple of times and give up and revert
to the previous thing. So this always requires communication between the bootloader and the
operating system. So we defined, that's actually another spec where we defined this generically
with CFI variables and things like that. We said this is how bootloader and user space
can communicate and can send each other commands basically. It also does early boot random
seed stuff. This is because traditionally in particularly in VM environments there was
no RDRan, no Virtio RNG things and then Linux really didn't like it. You didn't have to
any entropy in your VM and then certain things just hung and that's super annoying. So we
took a bit of inspiration with something that FreeBSD did which is an early boot random
seed. So basically you have a random seed that is stored in the ESP. You can update it
from user space and it is updated from user space. After we did this, Jason Donfeld who's
also the maintainer of the Linux kernel RNG, we wrote a couple of things that we kind of
confident nowadays that it's really good actually and the good thing is it works everywhere,
at least everywhere where you have EFI and make sure that from earliest moment on you
have really good entropy in addition to whatever the hardware might support you. It has automatic
enrollment of Secure Boot keys which I think is actually kind of nice. It implements like
this tofu concept for Secure Boot enrollment. So if you want to change your certificates,
which I think people should do and particularly in virtualized environments, then you can
just add the keys to the ESP and then on first boot up when we are in setup mode we'll just
enroll the whole thing and then we'll be locked down. So you have the trust on first use.
Like on first time you boot up, nothing is enrolled, nothing is trusted. That's the moment
where everything is trusted. Then you add the keys and from that point on this is how it's
locked down. It also has this thing where again with the drop in deer you can load additional
drivers mostly exist so that people who really want can make the ESP or something like that,
one of the weird file systems. Yeah, already mentioned briefly automatic boot assessment
exists which is like the infrastructure that we count before. We boot something,
how often we have booted it and then from user space can report back if that actually worked
and then I get this kind of robustness thing going. So much about system reboot. Boot control is
one part of the user space part side of things. Boot control is like a command line tool for
installing system reboot. That's kind of its primary job but it can do a couple of other
things as well. It's a use space side. You can tell it to boot on the next boot up to specific
menu entries. You can list the menu entries. You can update the random seed in a couple of
other things. We hope that it actually runs automatically on boot for example to update
the boot loader. It always will do this. To make sure that the copy of the boot loader that is
in slash user is instantly copied also like if it's for some reason the package manager
who ever updated system forgot this it's always kept up to date. So the focus is really that
the boot loader is always up to date. It also resets the random seed by the way like from the
Linux pool so that there's a good chance that the random seed is as good as it could possibly be.
So much about boot control. Next thing system destub. System destub is also UFI binary.
System destub is basically a little UFI binary that you glue in front of a Linux kernel and an
inodori that runs in UFI mode. It does a couple of things before it transitions into the actual
kernel. Why do we have this? It does a couple of things like for example it measures the payload
of what it's going to start. So now you might wonder if it's a UFI binary that a second would
sign and things like that. Why does it need to measure because firmware already measures all
second boot binaries. Very good question if you ask that. The reason we do this is because these
measurements that the firmware does are PCR9 I think and there's a lot of stuff in there and that
basically means it's hard to predict because there's stuff that is controlled by the firmware and
there's stuff that comes from the West and you cannot bind security to a PCR that has sources
that you cannot really control. At least you cannot do this in a predictable way from the West
point of view like figure it already out. Like you cannot predict it on basically the Fedora
bridge systems if you build Fedora. But if we do the measurement separately of the payload of the
UKI we can do that in a separate PCR and then we can predict it because in that PCR there's only
going to be the stuff that the West vendor controls and not also the firmware stuff and then cover
the firmware stuff with something else. UKI is what this becomes when you use system-based stuff
right like the combination of system-based stuff plus a kernel plus an inodori plus kernel
command line plus all these other kind of things that's what we call a UKI unified kernel image.
Yeah it is system-based stuff supports a couple of sidecars right like this UKI model that we try
to want to push distributions towards where you unify everything into one image that you can
sign measure as one update as one and things like that that comes as with problems like inherent
problems like for example the inodori that you built into this you like we expect that vendors
will build those on their build system so they're always going to be the exact same ones on every
installation which is great for many reasons but also horrible for others because depending on the
machines you will need large drivers large firmwares like Nvidia driver for example comes with
multiple hundred megabytes of firmware if you would always build that into all the UKIs that you
as a generic distro vendor ship to your people then yeah this will be really really large
second-build binary as it turns out because of all the measurements booting really large second-build
binaries works but it's kind of slow so I also had this inherent problem that yeah in this model
where UKIs are built on OS vendor build systems the question is open how do you parameterize that
right like because on a simple laptop you do not need to parameterization you can figure out
everything on its own but a learner is supposed to be generic right like you have these installations
that want additional parameters like they want to configure I don't know additional ways like
route passwords so that it can log into the inodori or a boot ice-gazzy device that you
actually want to boot to so these this I mean there's a reason why the kernel command line exists
people want to want to be able to do this in certain setups not a laptop is mentioned that
should not necessarily be necessary but the more you go to the server side they all want to do this
so we came up with a couple of ways how you can have sidecars so that even though while we push
everything to the UKI model where you have a single thing that is self-contained and that has
everything you can put next to it the sidecars that configure individual things like there's one
concept we call system creds I went into this in more detail in my earlier talk but let's just
summarize this at system decreds like the asterisk cred stuff that is that is basically short little
bits of information like like keys like cryptographic keys and passwords and things like that that you
need to operate but they're individual bits and they they are encrypted and locked to TPM so that
you can actually put them in an untrusted environment like for example the ESP where there's no
implicit trust and you have to authenticate it before you use it there's another concept we
called add-on if I add-ons which are basically the same idea as UKI's right you take you make a
PE binary that you can sign can you can measure as one however you leave out the Linux kernel the
inner D in all these kind of stuff and just insert the kernel command line that you would also
add to UKI so you basically have a binary that looks like a binary but doesn't contain any
code however you can authenticate it via the usual Secureboot usual shim APIs like it was a binary
because the UFI just cares that it's a PE thing so these add-ons as we call them are our way how we
can allow people to extend the kernel command line because when a UKI is booted and system D
stop takes over it will look for the side card files find this add that to the kernel command line
and boot on and it's in a fully trusted way because these things need to be authenticated the same
way as everything else is authenticated via the the shim Secureboot stuff I already mentioned this
the system you stop also does measurements right like of the content so that we get this isolated
out so that we have yeah one PCR that only contains the US stuff separate from the stuff where the
firmware is this means duplicate measurement but that's fine at least I think it's fine something
that also does it can read additional kernel command line options from SM bias type 11 I'm
not sure SM bias type 11 well I'm in the boot loader room so I hope you know what that is like
SM bias you you you probably all know is like this descriptive thing that the firmware passes to
the West and there's one object type you can add that's type 11 and it's wonderful because it's just
called vendor strings and you can put we can put anything in there that you want and various
virtualizers like QEMO for example allow you to directly set that from the kernel command line
from the QEMO command line and yeah we use that also to extend the kernel command line right like
so you can just on the QEMO command line sets a string that is just implicitly added to appended
to the kernel command line that is eventually booted we kind of want to push people actually to
the model where they use this more often it's actually an awesome thing and I'm kind of pushing
like trying to push all the cloud renters to adopt this as a generic way to provision data into
VMs but anyway other topic another component is UQify it's a basically it's a Python script that
helps you gluing together UKI so it will take system to stop kernel and I read sign it as one it
will also do the TPM predictions of what will the PCR will look like when it booted the signs
all that with second boot it gives you one EFI binary that you can just drop in the in the
SP and boots up and everything's secure and wonderful then one other tool system be measured
like much of this like all of the what I'm talking about here is actually part of system
me because I'm system the guy system the measure is a tool you probably don't have to interface
with it anymore because UK UK fight does that behind the back for you it's the actual engine
that predicts the PCRs that the UKI will will result in if booted yeah I just want to mention
that exists and yeah there's another tool called common stall as for the traditional distributions
so that they can ship inside of a devian package or RPM a kernel and that this tool it's like
plugin based and things that will copy the kernel into the SP and potentially it built the UKI at
that moment right like because we want to cover a couple of different models like one model where
the UKI is built on build servers of the OS vendor and another model more for the let's say
democratic devian style distributions where they can do this locally so that they can use their own
keys so yeah the kernel and styles are infrastructure to make this happen it's really nice this full
UKI support for example for this like so if you want to do your sign your own stuff you can
trivially do this because you can just use that and drop in your keys and Etsy and then it happens
magically there's something I don't have that much time anymore should we switch to questions
okay this is one of my last slides anyway assistant you part PCR log is one of the most
recent things it's a more complete prediction engine like I already mentioned the system
we measure tool which is able to predict the PCR measurements that a specific UKI will result in
system dPCR log is supposed to cover all the other PCRs that they are that are firmware stuff and
things like that system dPCR log deals with like all the other operating systems generally have this
like Windows Chrome OS Android they nowadays have all these predictions and well depending if they
actually care about TPMs or have some other second-hand clif thing doesn't really yeah it's all a
little bit different rare but the ones that care about TPMs generally have this prediction engine
where they just look at all the different things that happened during boot analyze the UEFI event
log and try to calculate a TPM policy to lock disk secrets to our version of the tool is called
system dPCR log it's supposed to be modular so you have again drop-in directories where
different components of the west that will show up in the boot pass like the UKI boot loader shim
and things like that plus components that are not even necessarily under the OS control but
our firmware stuff can be described with little jason fragments to just say the measurements that
I expected for each of these components there is a concept of alternatives because usually you
don't want to lock your secrets to exactly one kernel or one boot loader version because you
want to update them and then if that update fails you want to be able to go back and things like
that so usually for each component you want alternatives also very well supported and
system pcr log takes all this information explodes what all the the the pcr values could be in the
end and then generates a TPM policy out of this that it stores in a TPM and v index and that then
our disk encryption stuff can reference as an access policy long story short this covers like this
basically locks down the OS against the firmware versions with all the measurements that firmware
does that are not necessarily predictable for the OS because yeah the firmware people suck
there's also like support of course that if we cannot predict firmware measurements we have some
some logic there to deal with that so if you do all the combination of this then you get a super
secure system and everything's great my recommendation is do this but these components are relatively
independent of each other and as the things happen and different distributions started adopting
different parts of this earlier like for example Susan nowadays adopted system to boot already but
rel for example for the confidential computing stuff already adopted system to stop and they all
pick different parts of this okay my time is over so this is my my summary here if you use all in
combination everything works great but if you pick what you want you don't have to pick anything at
all if you don't want but if you use in combination you get this full boot chain stuff everything's
secure and relatively robust because all the update cycles are around individual files you have
ways how to parameterize it and extend it and yeah there are a couple of more slides we don't have
to cover them but let's move to questions
we have five minutes for questions
so yeah so the question was regarding whether the system D stop stuff works outside of UFI
environment the answer is no like it uses UFI APIs and it's just UFI all of the what I was talking
about here is more or less model after UFI system to boot system you stop absolutely only UFI but
the further you go with the with the like carline store for example that has nothing to do with UFI
like unless you actually use the parts with
well I mean I know it isn't there I think there are
sorry
so my my suggestion would that it would be a well just just
adopt UFI and avoid all this mess
I don't know I think everything has problems UFI have some my general like I mean I get this all
the time like this thing like oh we have to stick to grub because it supports all the non-UFI world
and I say sure my recommendation would always be if you look at this stuff like there are certain
like philosophical ideas built into this right like you have a drop-in directory you put on
type one type this kind of stuff is entirely generic and there's like type two is not generic
but type one is totally generic right like so my recommendation for it for that by the way is
just use UK eyes as they are right like they they are a PE wrapper like it's a really simple
format actually PE right like and it's just an envelope that carries sections for you
if I think grub now this can parse that too cannot see so if grub can parse it you stupid
bootloader should have no problem at all parsing it and then you suddenly have a universal format
and you boot windows style PE binaries even though it's not Windows but it's I think it's
it's the way to go like model it after UFI UFI has its words everything has its words but I think
it's way better than than the stuff that came before for it and just yeah so my recommendation
would always be if you can't do this stuff at least consider the ideas behind her a bit behind
that and like drop-in directories and sing like single file updates and these kind of things and
then try to model it afterwards and the more you can take over the easier will be your life because
this probably will end up in all the distributions and the less differences there are the easier it
is right so I think even grub supports type one at least on type two or something like this
so
so we're on purpose we wrote the spec as a generic thing both of like of all like there's a spec about
yuki yuki i there's a spec about the bootloader spec there's a spec about the bootloader interface
like where how how we do because we will always clear to us that not everybody's gonna do you if I
so uh yeah we did that as a nice service to the community but the other people have to figure out
if they actually want to adopt this it took them long enough to not adopt it so far but now things
are changing if you want to not do you if I my recommendation would be let's yeah look at the
specs and I'm sure like adds to shit to it like it's a spec senders like there's a getup issue
thing and if you need something else then send an issue and like if it makes any sense at all
we have no problem with adding that to specs very short yeah very short so all these projects are
system
well it depends like the specific age like so the question was if all these
projects are under the system the umbrella so that depends right like so we we created
like a group which you call the uapi group where we try to standardize these things right this is to
a large degree admittedly system the adjacent people right like who like adopted a way of
thinking like we do it but there's nothing specific in it and the specifications are on purpose
written independently of like the word system B doesn't show up in this but like it might show up in
the things but it's that's not the point of it right like so the code right like that's a
different story right like we this is in the system tree right like this is developed like
unix was developed I guess you have like this get repository and you have all these components on this
the fact that it's in there doesn't mean you have to use them you can mix and match them like is
mentioned like different distribution pick different things up like opens us it at sd boot first and
not sd stop and then sd the right hand was confidential computing take sd stop but it is
not interested in sd boot because they didn't want a boot load at all so yeah this is how it should
be right yeah we'll give you the buffet pick what you want don't pick what you don't want I don't care
but yeah this is ultimately it's very Linux focused various ufi focused very systemally focused but
I think look at the specs maybe you can reuse something but yeah
yeah I think even the uk i stuff like because we don't like you know how the firmware jumps into
your uk i that is not defined by us that is simply an artifact of the fact that's a pe file right
like so you can jump like any find any other way to jump into it you can even look for the Linux
kernel in it right like that's what grub does right so it looks for the linux pe section in it ignores
all the other stuff and if it wants to and then does the classic boot protocol that does not
do anything like this okay but anyway yeah thank you
you